hello and welcome history buffs my name
is Nick Hodges and to celebrate the new
year and season four just around the
corner we're taking a look at Vikings
this is my absolute favorite historical
TV show on right now there's not a
single bad episode that drags or feels
like it doesn't have anything
interesting to say
the characters feel real and authentic
to the time periods and we get to see
much of the Viking world in all its
glory from their political structure
their religion and its human sacrifices
to their methods of shipbuilding and of
course how they raided but as great of a
show Vikings is it's not perfect and
there are loads of inaccuracies I'll
talk about in this review since I'll be
covering real Viking history I have to
warn you there will be potential
spoilers from seasons one two three and
quite possibly beyond even though it
hasn't happened in the show yet I will
discuss the fate of the real Ragnar
lothbrok and the exploits of his sons
now the show could possibly go off in a
different direction but I have a very
strong feeling that these historical
events will be adapted into the show so
without further ado this is Vikings
the Vikings came from the frozen lands
of Scandinavia that make up the
countries of Norway Sweden and Denmark
with its bitterly cold winters much of
the landscape is covered with snow and
ice during the winter months and most of
the region is marked by deep water
fjords and mountains for an
agriculturally based society like the
Vikings land suitable for farming and
maintaining livestock was a precious
commodity aggressively contested by
neighboring clans civil war would often
break out of a fertile land with farms
and villages constantly being raided and
pillaged
some historians theorize of these
conflicts were the result of a
population explosion in the Viking
numbers and may have helped shape their
society to become so warrior based so
with very few prospects to lead a good
life
the Vikings look to the high seas to
seek their fortune as often is the case
with human beings struggling to survive
desperation is a great motivator for
innovation it is here that the Vikings
made their greatest technological
achievement the long ship unlike
traditional ships at the age that needed
to hug the coastline in order to get
what they were going the Viking longship
had no such restrictions their
revolutionary design allowed the Vikings
to adapt to their environment they could
venture out into the open ocean and they
could sail up rivers they were also
light enough to be carried over land and
their low draft hull gave them another
essential advantage which was speed and
they were fast with favourable
conditions a full sail and all the men
rowing long ships were able to reach
speeds of up to 14 knots this was
extremely crucial to their success as no
other vessel of the age was able to
catch up to them the Vikings were also
expert to navigation and use some pretty
creative methods on their long voyages
one such example is that when they
wanted to see if they were near land
they would release Ravens they had
brought abort if the Ravens did not
return then that meant land was nearby
and they would sail in the direction the
raven flew to if it returned to the
Namib there was no land in sight at
least for another 19 miles there's also
a theory that's been adopted by the show
where the Vikings use Sun stones which
were common calcite crystals to locate
the sun's position in an overcast sky
this theory does make sense to me since
the
Vikings would use the Sun more often to
navigate since they come from the high
latitudes of Scandinavia where summer
days are very long and also the summer
provided better sailing conditions for
their raids trying to find out how
historically accurate Vikings is has
been extremely difficult because much of
what we know that the real Vikings in
the late 8th and early 9th century is
shrouded in mystery and that's because
they didn't leave any written records
they were an illiterate people and
writing on parchment wouldn't be
introduced in Scandinavia until the
middle of the 11th century much of what
we know comes from three different
sources one of the chronicles written by
the Christians they came into contact
with who understandably had a very
biased opinion about the Vikings in fact
they made great efforts to demonize the
Vikings in a very colorful and
apocalyptic way for example in the
anglo-saxon Chronicle it is written in
the attack on Lindisfarne here were
dreadful four warnings come over the
land of Northumbria and woefully
terrified the people there were amazing
sheets of lightning and whirl winds and
fiery dragons were seen flying in the
sky a great famine soon follow these
signs and shortly after in the same year
on the sixth day before the Ides of
January the woeful inroads of heathen
men destroyed God's church in
Lindisfarne the second source of what we
know is Viking history is the
archaeological evidence they left behind
in their burial mounds their longships
and other places and finally there are
the Viking sagas now the sagas were the
stories of the exploits of famous and
great Vikings often told around the
fireside or in their great halls these
stories would rely on the memory of
whomever was telling it as they were
being told time and time again so you
can imagine how much of that original
story had been changed and elaborated
over the years I mean it's basically
like a messed up version of Chinese
whispers where the first message ends up
being totally different from what was
originally said switch ing pass it on
switch on engine pasa Tom you boys
switch engine
bitch on a pension suck my dong what now
imagine 15 generations of these stories
being told and you can understand why it
wouldn't be a good ideas take them at
face value by the time the sagas are
finally written down the Viking Age have
been over for centuries and they're so
full of fantastical elements that they
read like fairy tales Ragnar's in
particular way was said in his saga that
he slayed a dragon to win over his first
wife's hand in marriage
then he pretty much says the same thing
to win over lagertha I went to confess
my love to her but I was set upon by a
bear and an enormous hound who guarded
her home
I killed the bear it was my spear and I
managed to strangle the Hound with my
bare hands
none so I gained her hand in marriage so
this almost gives the makers of the show
a license to pretty much be as creative
as they want with a depiction of Ragnar
and Viking history but there are some
major inaccuracies embedded in the show
that we know for certain didn't happen
and also couldn't happen like the
starters Vikings presents Ragnar as the
leader of the Viking raid on Lindisfarne
in 793 but he's also shown to be leading
the attack on Paris but that took place
in 845 that's a gap of 52 years there's
no way he could have done both I mean
like let's do some basic math how old is
beyond before Ragnar sails off to
Lindisfarne he's 12 years old
all right so I'm gonna be generous here
let's say Ragnar had be on when he was
15 years old
that would make Ragnar 27 when he sailed
up to Lindisfarne in 793 so by the time
he attacks Paris in 845 he would have
been the ripe old age of 79 that's not
even mentioning the time of his death
which is around 865 which would have
made in 99 years old so sorry guys but
Ragnar lothbrok wasn't at Lindisfarne
but he definitely was at Paris so why do
Michel Hearst the creator of Vikings
have to have Ragnar and Lindisfarne if
he couldn't have been there I had a
character who was very curious that's
why we should sail west he needed to
prove to me and then to the
instead he was someone worth following
so he had to want to go somewhere and by
the same token someone was going to want
to stop him
so that was drama that maybe drama but
it's totally unfounded in history the
idea that in the late eighth century
Vikings did not know about England or
any other lands to the west is just
ridiculous there are no lands to the
west yes there are and you've totally
known about them for centuries not only
that but you had well-established trade
networks with the Saxons and Frisians
and yeah in the show Ragnar lothbrok is
the one who discovered England however
does this is an accuracy bother me oh
not really it is effective drama but
that's not the reason why it's because
this small plot point is foreshadowing
what is to come later with Viking
exploration these are the guys who
discovered Iceland Greenland and even
North America 500 years before the
Spanish ever did and I'm fairly
confident that this show will never
cover famous explorers such as Leif
Ericson so this is about as close as
we're ever going to get and finally
there are the costumes worn by the
Vikings you're probably going to think
I'm very petty here but I'll ask you
this if you've ever popped into a museum
and check out the Viking exhibition did
you ever want to see a display case
featuring the infamous leather biker
gear that all the characters in this
show seem to be wearing I admit that
their black leather tunics may look cool
but they're totally impractical and
don't offer any protection I mean unless
they were half naked berserkers tripping
out on magic mushrooms then Vikings
would wear gambeson which was a padded
jacket and if they could afford it that
they would wear chain mail over it along
with a metal helmet a real Viking would
look something like this I'm just
thinking that now that we've moved on
from the stereotype of Vikings wearing
horned helmets there's no real reason to
just not go all the way in my opinion
I could literally spend 20 minutes just
nitpicking the show on its numerous
inaccuracies but I'm not going to do
that because to sum everything up it all
boils down to two questions is Vikings
historically accurate not exactly is
Vikings historically authentic yes
absolutely
to me Vikings is an example of the
perfect balance between creative
licensing for dramatic effect and yet
remaining truthful to the time period
they may not look like Vikings but they
certainly act like Vikings they speak
like Vikings and their morals are that
of Vikings if you want to know what
really sold me with the show it was in
the episode with Ragnar and his men raid
Lindisfarne I remembered reading about
this raid long before the show was ever
made and I was curious to see how far
they were going to take it how faithful
were they going to be
nomine Patri at fili it's very to Asante
Paternoster she hasn't alias
this is exactly what happened in real
life the Vikings came in butchered and
enslaved these poor defenseless men and
yet these are our main protagonists in
the show whether we see them
slaughtering priests or raping nuns we
as an audience shouldn't be able to
sympathize with these characters at
least according to the absurd logic
applied by so many god-awful historical
movies but the makers of Vikings don't
pussyfoot around the subject and that's
what I love about this show because it's
unapologetic and doesn't flinch at the
idea of being authentic I think Leonardo
DiCaprio said it best in his interview
for wolf of wallstreet when he was asked
about how audiences would react to the
characters in his movie well that's
always the big question that you have
going into a movie whether you know you
feel audiences will be responsive to
people committing atrocious acts and it
all depends on you know not only the
subject matter but I think the honesty
and the way you depict these people and
that was one of the things that I've
already said very early on it like you
know through my experiences in making
movies if you're authentic with the
characters and who they are and don't
betray that people will go along with
anything it sounds like it should be a
no-brainer but we see so many movies
that feel like it has to hold the
audience's hand like child I mean you
only need to look at some of the crappy
films I've reviewed so far for example
in the Patriot Benjamin Martin frees his
slaves and treats them as equals in a
time where that was not a normal thing
to do in 1492 Christopher Columbus is a
tree-hugging hippy who wants to protect
Native Americans even though the real
Columbus committed genocide in Kingdom
of Heaven billion of evil is presented
as a social justice warrior even though
the real Balian was totally committed to
his crusade against Asteras ins I swear
to God they've roland emmerich or
reliefs covered to direct this show then
they would have some bullshit scene
where Ragnar stands up to
comrades and says no Rolo we shouldn't
do this killing unarmed priest is wrong
but fortunately he doesn't do that not
once do we see Ragnar tried to step in
and stop his men killing innocence in
fact the only time we see him show any
compassion is when he notices a little
girl hiding in a corner first he checks
to see if his men aren't looking then he
covers the girl with a blanket now I'm
sure of his men had notice then Ragnar
would have done anything to stop them
from killing her very dark stuff I know
but he had to understand that the
Vikings were not known for showing
compassion there was one famous Viking
called the child lover because he
refused to kill babies which the other
Vikings thought was hilarious because
they did that kind of stuff all the time
terror tactics such as these were
exactly why so many Christians fled in
sight of the Vikings they are coming let
us prepare look at what they've done
look at the league boat
now is this seen historically accurate
not exactly but it's very close to
something Ragnar really did in Frankie
er but not in murcia in 845 Ragnar
launched a fleet 120 long ships to
attack people the Frankish Emperor split
his army into two halves and assembled
them on both sides of the river Ragnar
decided to attack the much smaller force
whilst the other half was unable to do
anything except watch their comrades be
slaughtered on the other side of the
bank then Ragnar rounded up 111
prisoners sailed them to a small island
in the middle of the river and had them
all hanged in full sight of the
remaining Frankish forces who all fled
in terror unopposed the Vikings were
able to directly attack the city and
after much heavy fighting they finally
got it and sacked Paris they only
stopped short of burning it to the
ground when Charles the bald the
Frankish Emperor paid them a ransom of
seven thousand pounds of silver and gold
to leave he hoped that this payment
would be enough to stop future Viking
incursions it didn't in fact had the
exact opposite effect that would
encourage more Vikings to leave
Scandinavia in search of plunder the
sack of Paris was to be Ragnar's legacy
and greatest achievement but it would be
nothing compared to what his sons would
accomplish the sons of Ragnar lothbrok
will be spoken of as long as men have
tongue to speak
they will enjoy that much fame one of
them will marry the daughter of a king
another will discover and see you around
the sea that has no ties all this and
more have I foresee then they will have
more Fame than I they're fun
one of the reasons why I believe Ragnar
lothbrok really existed is because we
know his sons existed I find it hard to
believe that they all lied about him
being their father then why did no one
ever call them out on it a single
generation is not that big of a gap in
time in order to lie about something
that big
in any case whilst Ragnar's existence is
called into question by academics the
bloody legacy left behind by his sons is
not eclipsing their father's greatest
achievements by a milestone
now Ragnar had many sons but in the
interest of time I'm going to talk about
my favorite - in the show the seer
prophesizes how one son would discover
and sail around the sea that has no
tides and that son was Bjorn Ironside he
would go on to lead the longest Viking
raid of all in 859 Bjorn and his brother
hey Steen left the Seine River with a
host of 62 long ships and sailed to the
Mediterranean the sea with no tides as
they raid along the Spanish coastline
that came into direct contact with the
Moors the following battles intensified
as the Vikings sacked the cities of
Lisbon Seville and Cadiz and fought the
way through the Straits of Gibraltar
then they landed in Morocco plundered
the city of Necker and enslaved his
population continuing on with further
raids along North Africa beyond fleet
sailed to the south of France where they
spent the winter before pillaging nabban
neem and arla then beyond set out in the
most ambitious raid of all the city of
Rome however upon arriving in the north
of Italy the Vikings mistook the city of
Luna for Rome instead since it was too
well fortified for a direct attack they
asked for a truce stating that hey Steen
was sick and wanted to die a Christian
the clergy came out then baptized him
and the very next day word had reached
the cities bishop the hasting had died
and his last wish was to be buried in
consecrated ground within the city walls
I think you can see where I'm going with
this it was actually hey Steen not
Ragnar lothbrok who burst out of the
coffin and hacked his way to the city
gates allowing the Vikings to storm in
and sack the city the brothers then
raided Sicily and more of the North
African coast before finally turning to
head home however the Straits of
Gibraltar they were intercepted by a
Morse fleet
and lost 40 ships when the Moors used
Greek fire on them even so the wealth
beyond accumulated in his rate of the
Mediterranean set him up for life as one
of the wealthiest and most successful
Vikings in history and his success may
have had a helping hand in his father's
demise as Ragnar's jealousy made him
become more reckless and arrogant with
his raids in 865 during a terrible
thunderstorm Ragnar was shipwrecked in
Northumbria and was captured by King
Ayla finally having the chance for his
long-awaited vengeance King Ayla had
Ragnar thrown into a pit of poisonous
snakes
according to legend Ragnar's last words
before dying was how the young piglets
would squeal if they knew what the old
bore suffers with Ragnar's death King
Ayla had sealed the fate of England as
Ragnar sons would invade Northumbria in
866 with the largest Viking invasion in
history they will make up the
commander's what was to be known as the
great heathen army and leading them was
Ivar the boneless now for some of you
who just watched the show and may not
know a lot about Viking history you may
be surprised to find out that little
deformed baby that Ragnar thought could
possibly survive in their world became
the most feared and ruthless Viking of
his age and this is all in spite of his
potential disability according to Ragnar
sagas Ivar was born from a curse
prophesized by his mother I'll slog on
their wedding night
no more prophecies just want to feel the
warmth of it
I am afraid afraid of what
I arrived now came to the farmhouse he
wanted to have sex I told him if he
forced himself on me in the first three
days of his return I would bear him a
monster as to why Iver was called the
boneless is the subject of much debate
the saga say that he was born without
any bones in his legs which is of course
a medical impossibility one theory
suggests that I was suffered from
brittle bones disease which makes the
most sense to me seeing how the sagas
mentioned he had to be carried around on
a shield since he was unable to walk and
other theories of the name boneless was
actually an ironic nickname kind of like
Little John from Robin Hood and that
Ivar was in fact a really big guy with
larger than average bones the last
theory is actually the funniest to me
since the name boneless could have
implied that Ivar was either impotent or
just not interested in sex the sagas do
say that neither love nor lust played
any part in aivars life if that's true
then his name might as well be Ivar the
boneless there's a few more theories out
there but at the end of the day it
really is irrelevant he's remembered not
for his name but for what he did when
the great heathen army of several
thousand Vikings landed in Northumbria
its purpose was not to raid but to
conquer they managed to take the city of
York the Northumbrian capital and after
a few battles the sons of Ragnar finally
got their revenge as they captured King
Ayla Ivar ordered that he be given the
most gruesome of all Viking executions
the blood eagle what is above you the
offender gets down on his knees and his
back is open
miles relaxes
his ribs I chopped away from his spine
then his lungs pulled out of this huge
bleeding nose
laid upon his shoulders so they look
like the faulted wings of a great eagle
and he must stay like that until he does
for the next 20 years the great he that
army would destroy many of the old
kingdoms of England Scotland and Ireland
only the kingdom of Wessex was able to
stand up to the Viking onslaught led by
one of the greatest kings in English
history Alfred the Great all that
remains of England is were six the birth
of in England the idea of a single
Kingdom called England
asked to begin here there is nowhere
else but for how long will Wessex remain
the fate of Wessex will be determined by
Englishmen all Englishmen only by
joining together and saving Wessex can
we have England only by saving Wessex
can we have a a Northumbria a Bevin Burr
and of Wessex can't be saved then we are
all no more overall I'd say that this
show does an excellent job of creating
effective drama without compromising too
much of Viking history and I'm really
excited to see how season 4 will turn
out especially what will happen to Rollo
which I will discuss very briefly now
this won't be like some other videos and
YouTube that pretending to predict
season 4 based on nothing but conjecture
and personal interpretation it's like
they seem to totally forget that this is
a historical drama not the newest
fantasy show like Game of Thrones many
elements are fictitious of course but
the key events behind the real
historical figures must take place with
Ragnar he has to attack Paris and he has
to die in the pit of snakes the same can
be said with Rollo now his characters
based on a real Viking chieftain called
Rollo also known as Rolf
the Walker colorfully named so because
he was apparently so big there no horse
could support his weight
which pretty much sums up our role Oh in
a nutshell anyway the real Rollo was not
Ragnar lothbrok brother he actually had
no relation to him whatsoever he did
however lead a totally different attack
on Paris in 885 and invaded Frankie er
again in 911 the Frankish Emperor
offered his daughter princess Gilles
hand in marriage which we see in the
show and also signed a treaty in which
he would secede Frankish lands at the
mouth of the Seine to Rolo these will be
known as the land of the Northmen later
called Normandy Rolla then converted
into Christianity under the name of
Robert the 1st Duke of Normandy the
condition of this treaty was that he
would protect the Franks against any
more Viking invasions so in season four
we will finally see Rolo step out of
Ragnar shadow with a kingdom of his own
destined to be one of the most powerful
in Europe I love him he is my brother he
has taken me back
why am I still so on please you tell me
wise one what I will tell you it is
because I am useless surplice hollowed
out by failure missions I failed
what to laugh about
if you truly knew what the gods have in
store for you you would go down now and
dance naked on the pig understand I tell
you what I told Ragnar the bear will
marry a princess and I can tell you that
you will be present at the ceremony well
that about wraps it up my name is Nick
Hodges and thanks for watching history
buffs and remember if you like the show
help the channel grow don't forget to
hit that like and subscribe button and
let me know in the comment section what
you thought about Vikings and of course
what historical movie should I review
next in the meantime check out the
history buffs Twitter and Facebook pages
for new updates until then I'll see you
next time
Oh